[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other day, I dreamed I died and went to heaven.
[Amit Varma]: I was met at the gates by St. Peter, dressed in a flowery t-shirt and Bermuda shorts with
[Amit Varma]: a map of Bermuda on them.
[Amit Varma]: What's up dude?
[Amit Varma]: He asked me.
[Amit Varma]: Are you ready for heaven?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, yes, yes, I said breathlessly.
[Amit Varma]: I am very much ready for heaven, I can't wait to see what it's like.
[Amit Varma]: St. Peter started laughing.
[Amit Varma]: Ha, ha, ha, ha, even I can't wait to see what it's like.
[Amit Varma]: What do you mean?
[Amit Varma]: I asked St. Peter.
[Amit Varma]: Surely you of all people know what it's like, don't you live here?
[Amit Varma]: St. Peter said, Oh, I live here alright, but you see we are moving with the times.
[Amit Varma]: Now we customize heaven for you.
[Unknown]: You won't get the default version of heaven, but a customized one.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever your idea of heaven is, that's what you'll get.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, what's your idea of heaven?
[Amit Varma]: I was damn excited by this.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, here's my idea of heaven, I said to St. Peter.
[Amit Varma]: I want great weather, cool and sunny and breezy.
[Amit Varma]: I want seafood platters everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: I want lots of bacon.
[Amit Varma]: I want to see movies all day, beautiful music whenever I want.
[Amit Varma]: I want adoring women to fawn over me, just as it was back on earth.
[Amit Varma]: And also, yes, I want no possessions.
[Amit Varma]: St. Peter scratched his hipster beard.
[Amit Varma]: No possessions, he asked.
[Amit Varma]: No, I said, no one should own anything, just like in the John Lennon song, Imagine.
[Unknown]: Imagine no possessions, I wonder if you can.
[Unknown]: No need for greed or hunger, a brotherhood of man.
[Unknown]: Imagine all the people sharing all the world.
[Amit Varma]: Ha, said St. Peter.
[Amit Varma]: I'm amazed how many people asked for that.
[Amit Varma]: Your heaven is going to be kind of crowded.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, walk right in.
[Amit Varma]: I walked into heaven and it was exactly as I had asked for.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely weather, seafood platters everywhere with bacon on them, amphitheaters advertising
[Amit Varma]: the best of world cinema, an adoring woman circling around looking at me from a distance
[Amit Varma]: with lust in their eyes.
[Amit Varma]: I decided they could wait though, as I reached out for a delectable golden fried prawn from
[Amit Varma]: a seafood platter just near me.
[Amit Varma]: I picked it up and was just about to put it in my mouth when a hand came and snatched
[Amit Varma]: the prawn away.
[Amit Varma]: The hand belonged to a naked man who put the prawn into his mouth and gobbled it up.
[Amit Varma]: What are you doing, I asked.
[Amit Varma]: That was my prawn.
[Amit Varma]: No, it wasn't, said the guy.
[Amit Varma]: No possessions, bro.
[Amit Varma]: Everything here belongs to everybody.
[Unknown]: I reached out for another prawn and another hand of another naked guy grabbed the prawn
[Unknown]: away from me.
[Unknown]: And then a bunch of naked men jumped upon the seafood platter.
[Unknown]: What the fuck, I shouted.
[Unknown]: I want seafood.
[Unknown]: This is supposed to be heaven.
[Unknown]: Why are all of you naked?
[Amit Varma]: One of the naked men looked at me and said, no possessions, bro.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is about a subject that's really close to my heart, the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: It's actually the underpinning of all other rights and yet it's not taken seriously enough
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: So much so that it's not even a fundamental right in our constitution, though it started
[Amit Varma]: off that way.
[Amit Varma]: To discuss that, I have with me on the show, Shruti Rajagopalan, an economist and lawyer
[Amit Varma]: who teaches economics at Purchase College in the State University of New York.
[Amit Varma]: She's a constitutional expert and has just embarked upon a series of eight essays on
[Amit Varma]: the right to property for the online magazine that I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can find them in our opinion section or by searching for her name.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm delighted that she could make time to be with us on the show today.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: Hi, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It's really great to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, let me start by asking you, what is the right to property and why is it so important?
[Guest]: So I'll answer that question in two short parts.
[Guest]: There's a philosophical aspect to the right to property.
[Guest]: And this comes from, you know, the Lockean concept of natural rights that individuals
[Guest]: should enjoy the fruits of their labor.
[Guest]: So an example of that is, say you own a piece of land and you grew apples on that land,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You have the right to enjoy that land and the apples that come from it.
[Guest]: Now, this has a natural rights sort of aspect to it, but it's also very practical and commonsensical
[Guest]: in that society cannot flourish or prosper if people don't invest their labor.
[Guest]: And unless you have the right to property, there is no incentive for anyone to invest
[Guest]: their labor.
[Guest]: And that's really where the concept of the right to property comes from.
[Guest]: Now, the second aspect to it is the right to property in the constitutional sense.
[Guest]: Now, this is really not so much the right to property to enjoy it in itself, though
[Guest]: that's the main goal of it.
[Guest]: It is more a protection against arbitrary action by the government to take away your
[Guest]: property or take away enjoyment of that property.
[Guest]: So if you go back, you know, it's a fairly well-established idea.
[Guest]: You see this in, you know, Federalist Papers, Madison in number 51 says that one, we need
[Guest]: to empower the state and then you need to create a system where you oblige the state
[Guest]: to control itself.
[Guest]: So in a modern civilized society, you need particular kinds of state action.
[Guest]: Sometimes that involves regulating property.
[Guest]: Sometimes that might even involve compulsorily acquiring property.
[Guest]: But the idea is that we still need to constrain the state from any kind of arbitrary action.
[Guest]: And the right to property as a constitutional right provides for that.
[Guest]: So it's that the government has the right to take property, but there are a lot of restrictions
[Amit Varma]: on that right.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this is a point that is often lost in the discourse here in India, that the point
[Amit Varma]: of a constitution is not to grant rights to the people, but instead to recognize those
[Amit Varma]: rights, protect those rights and put restrictions on the state regarding what it can do with
[Amit Varma]: those rights.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I feel like the word right has become like a rhetorical device or a punchline, not just
[Guest]: in the context of property, but in the context of all rights.
[Guest]: Rights are absolutely meaningless unless they are enforceable.
[Guest]: And I'll give you a little bit of, when we're talking about the history of property rights,
[Guest]: I'll talk about how the founding fathers thought about it.
[Guest]: The framers in India and the founding fathers in the United States thought about enforceable
[Guest]: and non-enforceable rights.
[Guest]: And you're absolutely correct in that if the state doesn't invest in actually enforcing
[Guest]: that right and protecting the individual, saying that one has the right to free speech
[Guest]: or one has the right to free assembly is absolutely meaningless.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to ask you now about the history of property rights in India and how our founding
[Amit Varma]: fathers looked at them.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I'd also sort of like to make an additional point that in an economic
[Amit Varma]: sense, a world without property rights is impossible because of scarcity, because there is essentially
[Amit Varma]: a scarcity of everything.
[Amit Varma]: You need property rights, otherwise you would have chaos and anarchy.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So I just like to elaborate because I think you raise a very valuable point.
[Guest]: So when I was talking about the apple orchard, I meant in a very basic sense that, you know,
[Guest]: all systems have to be incentive compatible.
[Guest]: If you don't have the incentive to grow the apples, which you wouldn't if you couldn't
[Guest]: enjoy them at the at the end of the growth period, then you really wouldn't bother to
[Guest]: do it and there would be no apples.
[Guest]: Now in the broader sense of how do we organize economic activity, this kind of a system of
[Guest]: property can be contrasted with a system of no property, which is socialism.
[Guest]: And the biggest problem with socialism, which you correctly pointed out, eventually ends
[Guest]: up in chaos, is if you don't have property rights in a world of scarcity, and we know
[Guest]: that's the reality of the world, we live in a world of scarcity.
[Guest]: Without property rights, you can't get, you don't know what the opportunity cost is of
[Guest]: each and every action that is taken with respect to that property, right?
[Guest]: So only I know whether it is better for me to grow apples on a particular piece of land
[Guest]: or build a mansion on a particular piece of land.
[Guest]: And only I understand that relative trade-off for myself.
[Guest]: Now if you don't have that idea, that relative trade-off for oneself or what we call opportunity
[Guest]: cost, you can't get exchange ratios, which in modern terms are prices, right?
[Guest]: So I wouldn't know how to trade with you, whether I should sell that piece of land to
[Guest]: you, whether I should make a mansion for myself or whether I should grow apples.
[Guest]: And without prices, you cannot have any calculation of property, of profit and loss, which means
[Guest]: as a society, when socialist planners plan, they have no idea if you want to make more
[Guest]: apples or you want to make more homes.
[Guest]: And that's really what ends up in chaos.
[Guest]: So this problem of socialist calculation, which is now very, very well established in
[Guest]: economic science and mainly the demise of communist systems and socialist systems.
[Guest]: The root of that goes back to the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And the whole existence of a market and of prices and so on depends fundamentally on
[Amit Varma]: the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: And a market is essentially what is it?
[Amit Varma]: It's the embodiment of the voluntary exchanges that happen in society where we all interact
[Amit Varma]: with each other for mutual benefit.
[Amit Varma]: And if you don't have the right to property as a fundamental underpinning of that, society
[Guest]: breaks down.
[Guest]: I have a really ironic example for you.
[Guest]: So we know that in a modern sense, the greatest advocate of abolishing private property was
[Guest]: Karl Marx, right?
[Guest]: The really hilarious fact is if you were to visit Karl Marx's grave today, there's an
[Guest]: entry fee to see the grave.
[Guest]: And a lot of his fans and supporters protested that, unsurprisingly.
[Guest]: And the reason it was revealed was because no one has an incentive to maintain the site
[Guest]: where his grave is if he didn't charge for an admission fee.
[Guest]: So even Karl Marx's grave cannot be protected without the right to private property and
[Guest]: without charging for it.
[Guest]: So that tells you something about the way the world needs to work.
[Guest]: Even the most ardent communist fans will free ride and not invest if there is no such requirement.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to resist the temptation to express my schadenfreude here, getting on with the
[Amit Varma]: podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me then, what is India's history with the right to property?
[Amit Varma]: Did our founding fathers at the time of, you know, framing the constitution give it due
[Amit Varma]: importance in your opinion?
[Guest]: And what was then the general thinking around it?
[Guest]: So the first time you see any kind of like, you know, something that mimics a constitutional
[Guest]: right to private property kicks in in the 1935 Government of India Act, okay?
[Guest]: Article 299 in that had something really quite similar to the American clause, which is,
[Guest]: you know, you don't take property without compensation and without due process.
[Guest]: That's the general idea.
[Guest]: And it needs to be for public use, like these are the three main components.
[Guest]: However, it was the colonial government and these weren't fundamental rights and they
[Guest]: weren't enforced with the same force as they are in other jurisdictions that are not colonial
[Guest]: that did have those rights.
[Guest]: So it was more of lip service.
[Guest]: Immediately after that, we know that there are two things going on with the colonial
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: One is they were extensively building railways.
[Guest]: And after that, when the war broke out, they needed to acquisition and requisition property
[Guest]: to go towards the war effort.
[Guest]: So even though this article existed, it really wasn't the kind of protection one would seek.
[Guest]: So that's really where it all begins.
[Guest]: When the Constituent Assembly formed, I must say the framers of the Indian constitution
[Guest]: were intellectuals cut from a different cloth than what we see today.
[Guest]: In that they were familiar with a lot of political and intellectual history, a lot of constitutional
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: There were a number of very eminent lawyers and constitutional experts in the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly of India, starting with B.R. Ambedkar, A.D.
[Guest]: Krishna Swamy Iyer, K.T.
[Guest]: Shah, K.M.
[Guest]: Munshi.
[Guest]: So they were really big luminaries.
[Guest]: So it's not that they weren't aware of what police power was or the power of eminent domain
[Guest]: was to take property, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: However, they were also living in a particular context, which was feudalism, which had perpetuated
[Guest]: and persisted over centuries.
[Guest]: So one of the main goals was that while we create an equal society, we also need to make
[Guest]: the wealth holding or asset holding a little more equitable than what the zamindari system
[Guest]: had resulted in.
[Guest]: So it was sort of 1% of the population held 99% of the land.
[Guest]: And that was not a good way forward when you're thinking of a constitutional democracy.
[Guest]: So this is the trap they were in.
[Guest]: There were some socialist-leaning members who strongly believed that either there should
[Guest]: be no right to private property or it should be extremely diluted.
[Guest]: That is, the power of the government to take property must be extremely broad.
[Guest]: On the other hand, there were members like K.M.
[Guest]: Munshi.
[Guest]: K.M.
[Guest]: Munshi probably is the foremost when it comes to the debates on property, because it was
[Guest]: very, very rigorously debated and it became quite heated.
[Guest]: And K.M.
[Guest]: Munshi was really what I would like to call the Indian Madison in this particular context.
[Guest]: And he pointed out that zamindari and land reform issues aside, you absolutely do not
[Guest]: want to give the government, any government, including the Republic of India, that kind
[Guest]: of power to use arbitrary force against an individual.
[Guest]: And he was very farsighted in thinking that the present, that is, present generation at
[Guest]: that time, in the late 40s, those members were extremely public-serving, extremely public-spirited,
[Guest]: but future governments will have to be constrained.
[Guest]: And the only way to constrain future governments from any kind of arbitrary action would be
[Guest]: to have some kind of a restriction on eminent domain or the restriction of the government
[Guest]: to take private property.
[Guest]: So that is sort of the brief history of what happened in the Constituent Assembly.
[Guest]: Having said that, we didn't get the Madisonian airtight clause.
[Guest]: So in the United States, it's very clear that you can only take property for public use.
[Guest]: So the phrase is public use, and only by providing just compensation.
[Guest]: In India, they didn't have a strict public use.
[Guest]: So public use became public purpose in the original Article 31 of India.
[Guest]: And they didn't have the phrase just compensation.
[Guest]: It just became compensation, the standalone word compensation.
[Guest]: So that's where it started.
[Guest]: And it was very clear that the intention of this kind of a dilution was to allow land
[Guest]: reform legislation.
[Guest]: That was very, very clear and public purpose included land reform type measures, so that
[Guest]: it could dismantle the zamindari system.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a brief sense of then how the right to property being originally written in the
[Amit Varma]: Constitution, the way it was impacted, you know, our politics and our economy up till
[Amit Varma]: the 70s.
[Amit Varma]: And more critically, how the 44th Amendment came about and what it changed and why that
[Amit Varma]: change was important.
[Guest]: Okay, so this is going to be a bit of a long answer because we have a very convoluted history
[Guest]: with property.
[Guest]: So immediately after the Constitution was ratified and signed, we didn't have general
[Guest]: elections for another 15 or 18 months after that.
[Guest]: So governing the country was a body called the Provisional Parliament, which was really
[Guest]: the Constituent Assembly of India, which had transitioned into what was called the Provisional
[Guest]: Parliament.
[Guest]: Nehru was the prime minister, and this was pending elections, which happened in phases
[Guest]: in 1951 and 1952.
[Guest]: So the Constitution was ratified in January 1950, and from, say, 1948 to 1951, in that
[Guest]: period, all the provinces started passing land reform measures.
[Guest]: And land reform measures were your typical, like, you know, meant to be Robin Hood, take
[Guest]: from rich zamindars, distribute to poor peasants who were landless but had a very strong tie
[Guest]: to that land for a very long time.
[Guest]: That was the intention behind it.
[Guest]: However, the Constitution doesn't allow you to do that without providing compensation.
[Guest]: So some of these laws ran into trouble immediately in the courts because they didn't provide
[Guest]: for a suitable compensation mechanism.
[Guest]: So for instance, the law in Bihar was compensating rich zamindars only at three times the assessed
[Guest]: value and poor zamindars at 20 times the assessed value, right?
[Guest]: So that breaks or violates Article 14 in principle, which is equal protection.
[Guest]: So these are the sort of problems it ran into.
[Guest]: So either there were laws that were directly violating Article 31, or they were violating
[Guest]: one of the other fundamental rights.
[Guest]: Article 31, I must still say, in the early 50s, the judiciary gave it a very broad reading,
[Guest]: and almost all the judges were on the same page that you need some kind of land reform,
[Guest]: and Article 31 allows it.
[Guest]: But running into trouble with other fundamental rights was very, very problematic.
[Guest]: So this is the context in which one starts thinking of what do we do to save this provision?
[Guest]: And how do we move forward as a constitutional democracy?
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to make a brief digression here before you go ahead.
[Amit Varma]: It's not really the subject of this episode per se.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you think of those land reforms?
[Amit Varma]: Or conceptually of land reforms per se, you know, breaking down the zamindari system and
[Guest]: redistributing land?
[Guest]: So of course, conceptually, I think the zamindari system, or any kind of, you know, class or
[Guest]: caste system that is perpetuated is incredibly wrong.
[Guest]: And it goes against all liberal principles and liberal values.
[Guest]: Having said that, there are many, many unintended consequences of breaking down a zamindari
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: So first off, a lot of the measures, now you must remember that the zamindars were extremely
[Guest]: sophisticated, rich, and had huge means at their disposal to fight the battle legally
[Guest]: and otherwise.
[Guest]: The poor landless peasants were quite clueless, okay.
[Guest]: And in the midst of all this, there are always bureaucrats to act opportunistically.
[Guest]: So in most states, either land reforms didn't happen, or they were extremely unsuccessful
[Guest]: in that the intended beneficiary didn't actually get the land.
[Guest]: So there would be a few different types of scams that were running.
[Guest]: So before, like, you knew that the legislation had been enacted.
[Guest]: So the zamindars would quietly start changing their records, and start showing that the
[Guest]: land actually belongs to their wife's first cousin, their brother's second son, so on,
[Guest]: so forth, and try to remove any record of the peasant's family from the rolls.
[Guest]: So this was one scam that was going on.
[Guest]: It was fraudulent, but it was an unintended consequence of this kind of legislation.
[Guest]: The other thing that was going on simultaneously was that we didn't have very good records
[Guest]: of the intended beneficiaries.
[Guest]: The intended beneficiaries were steeped in the zamindari system.
[Guest]: They never wanted to be disloyal to the zamindar family.
[Guest]: So they didn't really fight for their rights and actually acquire the land that was supposed
[Guest]: to be distributed to them.
[Guest]: So these were two things going on.
[Guest]: So one of the consequences was it never really went to the person it was intended to go to.
[Guest]: The other consequence, which in a broader economic sense was very problematic, was India
[Guest]: broke down large size land holdings into small land holdings.
[Guest]: And we all know that small land holdings are not so productive, right?
[Guest]: So what would have been an ideal way to do things should have been to move a very large
[Guest]: population of landless peasants, transition them into other sectors of the economy, as
[Guest]: opposed to trapping them in agriculture with very small land holding systems.
[Guest]: So because the zamindar started breaking up land and giving it to their family members
[Guest]: to escape this kind of taking from the government, and any point when the peasant did get the
[Guest]: land, it was a very small piece of land.
[Guest]: Agricultural productivity just plummeted in post-colonial India.
[Guest]: If you remember, in the 50s, after that, because agricultural productivity plummeted, there
[Guest]: were a series of laws passed by various states which put a floor on the minimum size of land.
[Guest]: That is such a bizarre thing.
[Guest]: You have a ceiling on the minimum size of land and a floor on the maximum size of land,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So these were sort of the bizarre, unintended consequences.
[Guest]: You needed to pass more and more legislation to make the previous legislation work.
[Guest]: So you had very small size of holdings and the government says this is too small, you
[Guest]: need to make it bigger.
[Guest]: If you made it too big, you will run into the zamindari laws, they had to cut you to
[Guest]: size.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, we've had past scene unseen episodes on how on agriculture on how people are essentially
[Amit Varma]: trapped in agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a recent episode I did with Vivek Kaul on jobs where he made an interesting
[Amit Varma]: point that a lot of the recent demands for reservations, whether it's a patidar agitation
[Amit Varma]: or the jaat agitation, they are all landed classes.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the reasons that they are agitating now for reservations and government jobs is
[Amit Varma]: because over the generations, the land holdings have shrunk so much that they are simply not
[Amit Varma]: profitable.
[Amit Varma]: And yet they're not allowed to sell that land for non-agricultural reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, you know, in a sense, reducing it to debt capital, and I'd say that's another
[Amit Varma]: instance of the abrogation of the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless, let's get back to...
[Guest]: Yeah, so we get back on track on the original conversation.
[Guest]: So what ended up happening was all these laws that Nehru's government and the provinces
[Guest]: were passing ran into major trouble with the judiciary.
[Guest]: So Nehru's government was in a bit of a conundrum.
[Guest]: And this seems, now that we're so far removed from that situation, it's hard to understand.
[Guest]: But at that time, the constitution was so nascent, it didn't have much legitimacy.
[Guest]: The Constituent Assembly hadn't been voted in by adult franchise, it was limited franchise.
[Guest]: This was the elite group in India.
[Guest]: And Nehru was very worried that if you couldn't do land reform for constitutional reasons,
[Guest]: you would either have a revolution like a Maoist-style revolution on your hands, or
[Guest]: people would just toss the constitution out.
[Guest]: So what is the middle path?
[Guest]: You want to do land reform, you want to keep the constitution, what do we do?
[Guest]: We don't want to delete the right to private property.
[Guest]: We also don't want to get rid of the judiciary.
[Guest]: Now all these options were mentioned.
[Guest]: Some were even debated.
[Guest]: So the solution, this was partially proposed and supported by Ambedkar, who was the law
[Guest]: minister at that time, the solution was, let's abridge this right a little bit, but the abridging
[Guest]: of the right and the exception that we make will only be for zamindari and nothing else.
[Guest]: So Article 31A kicks in, Article 31A protects the zamindari land reform agenda from any
[Guest]: violations of Article 14, 19 and 31.
[Guest]: So 14 is the equality clause, 19.1F is the right to hold and dispose property, and 31
[Guest]: is the right to property.
[Guest]: That is the protection against eminent domain.
[Guest]: So this is where they landed.
[Guest]: They introduced another interesting provision on which we could do a whole separate podcast
[Guest]: called the Ninth Schedule, where they said any law that goes into the Ninth Schedule
[Guest]: is completely protected from judicial review.
[Guest]: That is, the judiciary cannot throw that law out, even if it violates fundamental rights.
[Guest]: Now even though that's a lot of like technical legalese, what it basically says is, if we
[Guest]: put a law in that list, it can violate the constitution, specifically the fundamental
[Amit Varma]: rights, and there's no problem.
[Amit Varma]: Thereby rendering the whole process farcical.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: But at the same time, everyone felt that this was intended for land reform.
[Guest]: And you know, I remember this, I mean, this is not quoting it verbatim, but Nehru during
[Guest]: the First Amendment parliamentary debates mentioned at one point, I can't foresee any
[Guest]: house, any member of parliament committing a fraud upon the constitution and the country,
[Guest]: when he was challenged by people like S.P.
[Guest]: Mukherjee that this is just too broad an exception.
[Guest]: So these people perhaps genuinely also believed that all politicians are public serving because
[Guest]: they'd all served in the nationalist movement together, they'd all been in jail together,
[Guest]: they'd all given up a lot of personal benefit and wealth to serve the public, to be in the
[Guest]: nationalist movement and eventually in government.
[Guest]: So they just assumed that people who come to these kind of government posts must be
[Guest]: the public spirited cases, which we know how false that is.
[Amit Varma]: I think the cognitive bias that Nehru felt for is called the availability heuristic in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that because he saw the politicians around him of his generation were so public
[Amit Varma]: serving and so on, he assumed that politicians through the ages would remain like that, which
[Guest]: of course we know is not the case.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And you know, one has to remember, like, if you think about it, Kameshwar Singh, who was
[Guest]: the main zameendar fighting all this, you know, he was the guy on the side of property
[Guest]: rights that he, that it needs to be protected, the constitution needs to be enforced.
[Guest]: He was extremely flamboyant.
[Guest]: I believe he owned hundreds of cars, this is the late 40s, had very, very, very vast
[Guest]: land holdings, you know, vacationed in London and Switzerland.
[Guest]: So he wasn't really a good poster boy in a public spirited sense, even though the argument
[Guest]: for protection of private property is fundamentally public spirited.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So now let's move on through the decades and talk about the 44th amendment.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So immediately after this, the fourth amendment, so I want to talk about very briefly a case
[Guest]: called Bela Banerjee in the 1953-54.
[Guest]: This was the state of West Bengal versus Bela Banerjee.
[Guest]: In this particular case, the government hadn't created principles for adequate compensation.
[Guest]: So the question came up of what is sufficient compensation?
[Guest]: Should compensation be market value?
[Guest]: The idea, this is an American jurisprudential doctrine that you need to be made whole.
[Guest]: When state takes your property, which it has the power to do under the power of eminent
[Guest]: domain, it can only do so by providing you compensation.
[Guest]: And the word compensation means to compensate you for taking that property away, which means
[Guest]: you're left about where you would have been had this property been in your hands even
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: So this particular legislation compulsorily acquired property and it did not provide compensation.
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court in Bela Banerjee said, it threw the law out and it said this is inadequate
[Guest]: compensation and compensation has to make you whole.
[Guest]: So the government passed the fourth amendment, which basically said that no law shall be
[Guest]: called into question for inadequate compensation.
[Guest]: So they were sort of making up the rules as they were going along.
[Guest]: There was a socialist agenda that they needed to unroll.
[Guest]: All socialism begins with very broad regulation of the economy and therefore regulation of
[Guest]: private property.
[Guest]: Anytime they ran into this kind of trouble, it went to the courts and then retroactively
[Guest]: they said, oh, that might have been a bad idea.
[Guest]: Now going forward, we need to make sure that compensation doesn't become a problem so that
[Guest]: other states don't run into the same problem West Bengal ran into.
[Guest]: So that's sort of how they operated.
[Guest]: After the fourth amendment, which was 1954, this question kept coming up, this question
[Guest]: of inadequate compensation.
[Guest]: It came up in the 17th amendment.
[Guest]: There were like small and large tweaks made.
[Guest]: The major tweak after that came during the 25th amendment.
[Guest]: So have you heard the name R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper?
[Guest]: He was sort of a hero among those who believe in property rights.
[Guest]: So R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper was the plaintiff in the bank nationalization case.
[Guest]: So in 1969, during the commanding heights, when Indira Gandhi decided that we need to
[Guest]: go towards not like mixed economy kind of socialism, but full blown socialism, she slowly
[Guest]: started nationalizing all the sectors in the economy.
[Guest]: One of the sectors which is particularly difficult and tricky to nationalize is banks because
[Guest]: the flow of funds can happen overnight.
[Guest]: So while you're passing legislation and so on and so forth, banks might just empty their
[Guest]: coffers or move the money into a non-bank institution and things like that.
[Guest]: So any kind of bank nationalization when it is done is a complete surprise.
[Guest]: So she announced it through an executive order and then passed law giving validity to the
[Guest]: executive order about two weeks later.
[Guest]: So bank nationalization essentially nationalized private banks in India.
[Guest]: R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper challenged this as a shareholder of one of the banks, saying that he had not been
[Guest]: adequately compensated for taking of property.
[Guest]: So nationalization of bank is also a takings, right?
[Guest]: So R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper is a very important case in Indian jurisprudence because number one, it recognizes
[Guest]: all forms of property, including the rights of shareholders and debtors, et cetera, as
[Guest]: property that comes within this Article 31 framework.
[Guest]: The second thing was R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper, the court said in the majority opinion that the government did not provide adequate
[Guest]: compensation.
[Guest]: It did not make these people whole.
[Guest]: But you must remember that's the precise point of bank nationalization, right?
[Guest]: The government's treasury is running low.
[Guest]: It wants to, one, appropriate the wealth of the banks, two, have access to a credit system
[Guest]: where it can do all these loan waivers and, you know, all sorts of things like mess around
[Guest]: with the credit system and subsidize credit to favored groups.
[Guest]: So that's sort of the intention of bank nationalization.
[Guest]: So given that that's the intention, there is no way they create a compensation system
[Guest]: that will benefit people and make them whole.
[Amit Varma]: So let me interrupt you and ask you a newbie question then.
[Amit Varma]: How did they determine the compensation that was to be given to the holders of those banks?
[Guest]: Well, that's the thing.
[Guest]: So depending on which particular case or which legislation you're talking about, they left
[Guest]: the principles extremely vague.
[Guest]: Sometimes the laws would say the principles to be determined by the executing authority.
[Guest]: So the law, the legislation itself will not prescribe principles.
[Guest]: Sometimes it would just come up with an arbitrary amount, let's say 100 rupees per share or
[Guest]: something like that, and not provide any justification or principle for why 100 rupees is the compensation
[Guest]: that you decided to give when the share was trading in the market for, say, 1000 rupees.
[Guest]: So I'm just making up these numbers.
[Guest]: These are not actual numbers from the cases, but just to give you a sense of what was going
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: Very arbitrary.
[Amit Varma]: So what was the ruling in the R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper case?
[Guest]: So the ruling in the R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper case was against the government.
[Guest]: So that's the broad thing.
[Guest]: There were many, many sub issues that were discussed in the R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper case.
[Guest]: The fundamental point being, what is the definition of property?
[Guest]: What is public purpose?
[Guest]: And what is compensation or adequate compensation?
[Guest]: Now, interestingly enough, Indian jurisprudence has been very, or rather, there is no doctrine
[Guest]: on what public purpose is.
[Guest]: So this might shock you, but when you look at case after case on the right to property
[Guest]: or pretty much any other regulatory power of the state, the Supreme Court has sort of
[Guest]: deferred to Parliament.
[Guest]: What I mean by that is public purpose is whatever Parliament says is public purpose.
[Guest]: So if the legislation says that it is in the public interest to regulate the banking system,
[Guest]: then it is in the public interest, like courts won't interfere with what constitutes as public
[Guest]: purpose or public interest policy.
[Guest]: They are merely going to say, see that once you have declared that this is in the public
[Guest]: interest, are you following due process or like proper procedure to determine principles
[Guest]: of compensation, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So on the question of public purpose, not only was R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper weak, but every case in India has been hopeless on that particular issue.
[Guest]: Consequently, India has no doctrine of public interest or public purpose.
[Guest]: And by doctrine, I mean like a principle or a rule that is consistently applied by courts.
[Amit Varma]: On that, it was weak.
[Amit Varma]: Can you contrast this with, say, the US, which does have such a doctrine and you know what
[Guest]: the implications of that are?
[Guest]: Well, so the US also has seen very bad times recently.
[Guest]: But initially in the United States, public use meant something very close to public goods.
[Guest]: So like roads, railways, typically roads, dams, railways, these are situations where
[Guest]: one individual property holder might create a holdout.
[Guest]: That is, you know, one person whose farmland is affected by the rail line might hold out
[Guest]: and not sell that property to the government or to the rail company.
[Guest]: And that is going to stop the rail company or the government from laying down a line
[Guest]: that will bring a huge amount of prosperity to the whole region.
[Guest]: And obviously one or two people are bearing the cost, so they hold out.
[Guest]: So the purpose of eminent domain was to prevent these kind of gridlocks or holdouts, but it
[Guest]: was restricted only to public use.
[Guest]: So there are a few types of goods like, say, roads or dams, which typically face what we
[Guest]: call the collective action problem.
[Guest]: A lot of people need to come together to make that work, a lot of little pieces of land.
[Guest]: In India, you see this problem over and over again with dams and the catchment area, right?
[Guest]: The moment you build a dam, the catchment area of the river overflows and all the people
[Guest]: who have land near the riverbed are going to be affected by it because their land is
[Guest]: now underwater.
[Guest]: So you see this problem over and over again.
[Guest]: China has solved the problem of dams by being a communist state, right?
[Guest]: The United States solved that problem using eminent domain but providing full compensation.
[Guest]: The Indian government in its nascency had a bankrupt treasury.
[Guest]: So even if they wanted to fulfill these constitutional principles, they didn't have the money to
[Guest]: provide the zamindars the full compensation.
[Guest]: It would have also sort of destroyed the point of the zamindari system.
[Guest]: So in India, it was broadened to public purpose.
[Guest]: We moved away from the idea of a strict compensation doctrine.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, the difference between our doctrine back then and what the US's was,
[Amit Varma]: was a difference of necessity.
[Amit Varma]: Our government didn't have the coffers in any case to provide just compensation.
[Guest]: So what do you think?
[Guest]: I think it was a question of necessity.
[Guest]: And I think it was also just a slightly flawed ideological vision.
[Guest]: If you really think about when you read the Federalist Papers or when you read George
[Guest]: Mason, James Madison, what you see is a deep understanding of human nature and the idea
[Guest]: that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
[Guest]: You don't see that in the Indian nationalist movement.
[Guest]: There is recognition of the idea that men may, and when I say men, I mean all humans,
[Guest]: that individuals may act opportunistically.
[Guest]: But given the context of the nationalist struggle, they didn't take that very seriously.
[Guest]: Whereas in the United States, that idea was taken very seriously and to its absolute logical
[Guest]: conclusion.
[Guest]: And that's why they had such strong constitutional constraints that were so difficult to amend.
[Guest]: And in India, there was, you know, it was, it was slippery.
[Guest]: There were, there were gaps in what they intended and what they wrote.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so let's, let's get back to the 70s now, post, post R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper.
[Guest]: So post R.C.
[Guest]: Okay, so now you started getting the drift, right, that the biggest problem or the biggest
[Guest]: reason that the right to property was under threat was because the government wanted to
[Guest]: execute socialism.
[Guest]: So socialism and the right to property are obviously fundamentally incompatible.
[Guest]: So even though Nehru wanted to do a mixed economy model, not full-blown socialism, not
[Guest]: full-blown communism, what you essentially get is something very similar to full-blown
[Guest]: socialism.
[Guest]: It just happens gradually, right?
[Guest]: It doesn't happen overnight through revolution.
[Guest]: It happens gradually through legislation.
[Guest]: So that's what you see happening in India.
[Guest]: Now, we know that in 1975, there were a bunch of unexpected events.
[Guest]: When Raj Narayan challenged Indira Gandhi's election, she invoked the emergency.
[Guest]: Now during the emergency, she realized that to protect the seat of power and to make sure
[Guest]: that all the power was concentrated in the executive and not separated between executive,
[Guest]: legislature, and judiciary, you needed a sort of constitutional reform.
[Guest]: And her, and again, I'm not going into detail, just very broadly, her justification for this
[Guest]: kind of concentration of power in the executive was that the government needed to do something
[Guest]: for progress and development.
[Guest]: So this is things like the Garibi Hatao movement, you know, abolition of privy purses, of nationalizing
[Guest]: all kinds of industries.
[Guest]: So all of these were welfare programs under Indira Gandhi's agenda, and they had mass
[Guest]: support at the time before the emergency, and a very large part of the 42nd Amendment
[Guest]: was we completely redraft the fundamental structure of the Constitution to really vest
[Guest]: the power with the executive and all the other wings of the government are just, you know,
[Guest]: they'll be secondary.
[Guest]: She was successful in doing that.
[Guest]: Immediately after, so 42nd Amendment is the worst thing that ever happened to the Indian
[Guest]: Constitution.
[Guest]: Immediately after that, however, she called for elections and she lost.
[Guest]: So the Janata government came in 1977, 78, and they decided that they will undo a lot
[Guest]: of the things that the Indira Gandhi government had done in the 42nd Amendment.
[Guest]: So 43rd and 44th Amendment were what I call, you know, a kind of like a restoration process.
[Guest]: They were trying to make things go back to the pre-1975 needle.
[Guest]: And they succeeded in all of that, except restoring the right to private property.
[Guest]: And the reason for that was Morarji Desai's government, heavily influenced and supported
[Guest]: by Jayaprakash Narayan, was even farther left than Indira Gandhi's government.
[Guest]: They were hardcore Gandhian socialists who truly wanted to abolish the right to private
[Guest]: property.
[Guest]: The history of this goes back to the Constituent Assembly.
[Guest]: Jayaprakash Narayan protested the right to property even when the Constituent Assembly
[Guest]: had drafted it.
[Guest]: And he had written to B.R. Ambedkar saying, the socialist wing of the Congress Party is
[Guest]: absolutely against this particular provision.
[Guest]: So needless to say, that is the provision that got hacked in 1978.
[Guest]: Having said that, the hacking of the provision or the deletion of the right to property in
[Guest]: 1978 was just a formality, because the 25th Amendment before that, you know, which was
[Guest]: a response to R.C.
[Guest]: Cooper, had already done a lot of damage, the 17th Amendment, the Fourth Amendment,
[Guest]: the First Amendment.
[Guest]: So it had already really diluted what a protection from eminent domain power looks like.
[Guest]: So this was just a formality.
[Guest]: I will, however, say what it actually did.
[Guest]: Now, in India, we say right to property is not a fundamental right.
[Guest]: It is only a legal right.
[Guest]: So what the 44th Amendment did was it moved the right to property from the fundamental
[Guest]: rights chapter, that is Article 31 and all the follow-ups of Article 31, and it moved
[Guest]: it to a provision called Article 300A.
[Guest]: And Article 300 simply says the state shall not take property save for the authority of
[Guest]: law.
[Guest]: What does that mean?
[Guest]: It means that we have zero protection against any legislation that takes property.
[Guest]: We have some protection if an executive authority takes property without legislation.
[Guest]: So what that means is, let's say tomorrow the government passes a land acquisition bill,
[Guest]: OK, and says we need to redevelop the Sat Bangla area, which is where you live, Amit,
[Guest]: and all the land in Sat Bangla area is hereby acquired, and they don't give any compensation
[Guest]: or they give very little compensation.
[Guest]: Now in the current scheme of things, we have no judicial recourse to that.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because fundamental rights protect us against actions of the legislature.
[Guest]: A legal right under Article 300A only protects us from the actions of the executive.
[Guest]: So as long as legislation was passed using proper procedure, the law will hold.
[Guest]: Now what does Article 300A protect us from?
[Guest]: It protects us from things like an overenthusiastic municipality taking over land without any
[Guest]: sort of legislation backing it.
[Guest]: Many scholars have argued that demonetization was actually a violation of Article 300A.
[Guest]: So they say that demonetization should have had an ordinance that was passed with retroactively
[Guest]: enacting legislation, which the Modi government did not do.
[Guest]: So just passing an executive order and saying 86 percent of India's currency is no longer
[Guest]: valid should have run into trouble with Article 300A had someone challenged it and had the
[Guest]: court taken it up.
[Guest]: I believe a property rights scholar called Namita Wahi made this argument that the demonetization
[Guest]: action was completely unconstitutional because of Article 300A.
[Guest]: So you can see that 300A will only protect you from the most extreme cases of arbitrary
[Guest]: action, but most cases of arbitrary action are now completely allowed when it comes to
[Amit Varma]: property.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all this talk of amendments, 4th, 17th, 42nd, 44th, just reminds me of the observation
[Amit Varma]: that our constitution is less of a book and more of a periodical.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure even if the 44th amendment wasn't there, it wouldn't really have made much difference.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the right to property would have been constantly breached over the years anyway.
[Amit Varma]: But to get to the crux of the show, then what are the unseen effects of the right to property
[Amit Varma]: being as diluted as it is today?
[Guest]: Okay, so there are a few things.
[Guest]: I want to distinguish unseen effects and unintended effects for the moment.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you what I mean by that in a minute.
[Guest]: Though unseen and unintended consequences are very similar in an economic sense, sometimes
[Guest]: in a constitutional sense, not so much.
[Guest]: So let's say you own a printing press, okay, and that printing press is publishing things
[Guest]: against the government.
[Guest]: Now you should be protected unless you're doing something against public morality or
[Guest]: it's publishing pornographic material, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Technically or constitutionally, your right to free speech is protected by the constitution
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: However, the right to free speech only protects speech, it doesn't protect the press.
[Guest]: If the government has the authority to nationalize the press, you lose your right to free speech,
[Guest]: but indirectly, right?
[Guest]: This is why a lot of property rights scholars say that all rights essentially boil down
[Guest]: to the right to private property, because right to private property is the way that
[Guest]: you get the means to express action that is protected by all the other rights.
[Guest]: Similarly, let's say you own a monastery or you run a monastery that is held in a trust.
[Guest]: If the government decided that it wanted to build a road where your monastery is tomorrow,
[Guest]: it would technically be an infringement on your religious freedoms, but it falls under
[Guest]: eminent domain power, which we have no protection from.
[Guest]: So I'm not saying that courts have not been reasonable.
[Guest]: Whenever these kinds of cases have come up, the courts have read it broadly, and they've
[Guest]: talked about the indirect effect and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But you do understand through these examples just how crucial the right to property is.
[Guest]: It's not just an important right if you're a capitalist or a zamindar, or if you run
[Guest]: a business, it's an important right for any individual, any citizen in India who wants
[Guest]: to live their life and express themselves.
[Guest]: So that's the fundamental crux of what we mean by right to property.
[Guest]: Now there are two different kinds of effects, okay?
[Guest]: Now the unseen effect of diluting right to property is things like it's going to start
[Guest]: infringing on other rights, which you didn't exactly foresee, right?
[Guest]: So if the government decides to regulate certain industries, decides to build a road where
[Guest]: monasteries used to exist, decides, you know, you see these little temples and mosques in
[Guest]: like street corners in India, if the government decides that it's in public purpose to widen
[Guest]: the street and it knocks down one of these temples, now where do you go from there?
[Guest]: So that is one sort of unseen effect of diluting the right to property, which is all your other
[Guest]: rights are suddenly in jeopardy.
[Guest]: And that was never the point of all these amendments, okay?
[Guest]: Now the unintended consequence is much broader and so much more perverse.
[Guest]: And here I really want to focus on the word intention.
[Guest]: Now given that we've discussed the history of property rights in India, you know that
[Guest]: a very large part of the initial dilution came because of the land reform Zamindari
[Guest]: program.
[Guest]: However, what it did was it opened up gaps and it weakened the constraints that we have
[Guest]: on the state.
[Guest]: So as you know, nowadays all the punchline of every government is that we want development,
[Guest]: we want foreign investment, we want domestic investment, we want industry to come into
[Guest]: the state, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And to attract industries to come and set up in the state, governments need to provide
[Guest]: those industries pieces of land.
[Guest]: It's really hard to acquire land in India, and we'll discuss that in a little more detail
[Guest]: in a bit.
[Guest]: But let's just say it's hard to acquire land privately in India, and now the government
[Guest]: has started using this power of eminent domain to take land from farmers and give it to large
[Guest]: companies.
[Guest]: So if there is a tribal group which is occupying an area which has very rich natural resources
[Guest]: underground, then the government nationalizes that land, takes away all the rights of the
[Guest]: tribal group, and gives it to like a big mining company.
[Guest]: A few years ago there was a very high profile case in Shingur where Tatas wanted to set
[Guest]: up the Tata Nano factory in Shingur in West Bengal.
[Guest]: Mamata Banerjee, who was in opposition at the time, created huge protests and got them
[Guest]: thrown out.
[Guest]: But what was happening in Shingur and what led to the protests was that the government
[Guest]: was taking land away from farmers, not providing them market compensation, and putting together
[Guest]: the land in large parcels and giving it to Tata, right?
[Guest]: So this is really an unintended consequence, like all the framers must be turning in their
[Guest]: graves because this is the precise opposite of what they intended for the beneficiaries.
[Amit Varma]: This is actually a redistribution from the poor to the rich.
[Guest]: I call this reverse Robin Hood.
[Guest]: That's exactly what it is.
[Guest]: So you take land from the poor and you give it to the rich, and they are the poor even
[Guest]: though they are the landed poor for various other reasons of how we have shackled agriculture
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: But that's really what is going on right now.
[Guest]: So you see a lot of protests by farmers all the time against these big companies.
[Guest]: And government after government focuses on how it is now a capitalist or a market-friendly
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: But they are still violating the same principles.
[Guest]: They're taking land from the poor now, they're giving it to the rich instead of taking land
[Guest]: from the rich and giving it to the poor.
[Guest]: All without compensation.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a step sideways and talk about agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you think about it, one of the big reasons agriculture is in such a mess
[Amit Varma]: today is that people are essentially trapped in agriculture without an escape route.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason for that is the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: They're not allowed to sell agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes.
[Guest]: So okay.
[Guest]: So I think liberalization of agriculture is a really big topic.
[Guest]: There are lots and lots of restrictions that came into the agricultural sector under the
[Guest]: guise of protecting farmers.
[Guest]: But what they did was that they really messed up agriculture.
[Guest]: I want to focus on one or two of these kinds of regulation as opposed to talking about
[Guest]: the entire agricultural sector.
[Guest]: Now in India, we have a number of restrictions on agricultural land.
[Guest]: So you have restrictions in many states that you can't sell agricultural land to someone
[Guest]: who is not a farmer.
[Guest]: The second is anytime you want to use agricultural land for any other use, you need something
[Guest]: called a change of land use certificate.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's a single certificate.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's a number of licenses.
[Guest]: So this is a state subject.
[Guest]: So it varies from state to state.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now what this does is, let's say you're a farmer and we know that if you have a small
[Guest]: landholding size in India as a farmer, you're not doing very well.
[Guest]: If you have a bad crop or a bad season, or let's just say you're sick of being a farmer,
[Guest]: you don't want to do that anymore.
[Guest]: You think there are more opportunities in the broader economy which have nothing to
[Guest]: do with agriculture.
[Guest]: What would you logically do?
[Guest]: You would take your farmland, you would hope to sell it, get the money from that, either
[Guest]: invest it in your next venture or put it away as savings while you retrain or retool yourself
[Guest]: to merge with the non-agrarian economy.
[Guest]: Now what these laws do, the laws that say you cannot sell agricultural land to a non-farmer,
[Guest]: is they suddenly shrink the market for your asset.
[Guest]: And when they shrink the market for your asset, they basically drop prices of where your asset
[Guest]: can be priced.
[Guest]: So now, if it's all demand and supply, if there were 30 people who could buy your land,
[Guest]: the price would have gone up.
[Guest]: If there are only three people who can buy your land, the price goes down.
[Guest]: We must remember that a lot of other farmers are in the same situation as this farmer,
[Guest]: Exhibit A, who is hoping to exit agriculture.
[Guest]: They barely have the means to make their agricultural enterprise work, let alone buy the neighbor's
[Guest]: farm.
[Guest]: So you've really sort of restricted the market so much, you've almost made it irrelevant.
[Guest]: So now what do we do?
[Guest]: You can't exit agriculture.
[Guest]: Now let's say I can't exit agriculture, but I have my land.
[Guest]: Maybe I can't sell it, but maybe I can use my land for something else.
[Guest]: Now there's a problem with that also.
[Guest]: You need to go to the government and request a change of land use certificate.
[Guest]: Now Amit, I've heard podcast after podcast of your scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Every time there's a regulation, what kind of corruption and rent-seeking it encourages.
[Guest]: So I don't really need to go into detail for you or the listeners on what a change of land
[Guest]: use certificate licensing requirement might do.
[Guest]: There are a lot of middlemen, a lot of bureaucrats who try to take that cut.
[Guest]: So now a farmer is in a position where he can neither sell his land nor easily convert
[Guest]: the land to a different use like a small industry or a bed and breakfast or something else.
[Guest]: So this is what I mean by agriculture is shackled and farmers are trapped in a very low productivity
[Guest]: or high risk environment.
[Guest]: So that's where we start.
[Guest]: I just want to digress a little bit at this point.
[Guest]: There is a difference between regulatory takings and actual takings.
[Guest]: This is more a distinction in the United States jurisprudence.
[Guest]: This distinction really doesn't exist in India, given that we barely have any protection from
[Guest]: actual takings.
[Guest]: But the idea of regulatory takings is the government has broad police power to regulate
[Guest]: the economy.
[Guest]: So some of these regulations are reasonable, such as zoning laws saying that you can't
[Guest]: have an industry which makes a lot of noise or which has a lot of pollution to be in the
[Guest]: middle of the city.
[Guest]: So certain laws that regulate the use of property are considered reasonable.
[Guest]: However, if you regulate the use of property such that you deprive the property holder
[Guest]: from most or all of the economic benefit, then it's called a regulatory taking.
[Guest]: What that means is that the legislation didn't actually physically take the land away, but
[Guest]: they created regulation or restrictions such that it's almost as if they took the land
[Guest]: away.
[Guest]: So an example of that in American cases would be something like, let's say a property zoning
[Guest]: law said you need to have 100 square feet of trees planted on your property before you
[Guest]: build a house.
[Guest]: Now if your property is only 100 square feet, then the zoning law interferes with your enjoyment
[Guest]: of your property, right?
[Guest]: There's no way you can build a house on that property.
[Guest]: So that would be an example of regulatory takings.
[Guest]: There are similar examples for beachfront properties, you know, a lot of it has to do
[Guest]: with environmental regulation in the United States.
[Amit Varma]: Let me try to illustrate your point by coming back to the Indian farmer.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So in the Indian case, sorry, I'll just finish this and then you can jump in.
[Guest]: So in the Indian case, when you say that a land cannot be used for non-agricultural use,
[Guest]: and right now non-agricultural use is the primary value emanating from that land, agricultural
[Guest]: use is extremely depressed, either because that land is no longer productive, or that
[Guest]: what you're growing is no longer valuable, or the size of the holding is too small, so
[Guest]: on and so forth, the regulation is almost as if you took the land away without actually
[Guest]: taking the land away.
[Guest]: So the change of land use certificate in some places which are where, you know, you're kind
[Guest]: of semi-rural going into sort of some kind of small urban transition, maybe 4 to 5x.
[Guest]: When you're talking about places surrounding big cities like Mumbai or Delhi, like outskirts
[Guest]: of Gurgaon, a change of land use certificate can yield up to 40x the value of the original
[Guest]: piece of land for its farm use.
[Guest]: That is the difference that we're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: So let me illustrate this for my listeners by, you know, taking a hypothetical farmer.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say I'm a hypothetical farmer and I own a small piece of land, which if the market
[Amit Varma]: was open and I could sell it to anybody for anything, would be worth 40 lakhs.
[Amit Varma]: But because the market is restricted and I can't sell it for non-agricultural purposes
[Amit Varma]: and I can only sell it to another farmer, it's not worth 40 lakhs, it's worth 1 lakh
[Amit Varma]: to use the 40x which you gave me.
[Amit Varma]: So what therefore happens is that if I was allowed to sell it to anyone, a Tata who wanted
[Amit Varma]: to set up a nano factory would come to me and offer me 40 lakhs.
[Amit Varma]: But here what is happening is because they are not allowed to do so, the government becomes
[Amit Varma]: almost a necessary intermediary by the existence of this law.
[Amit Varma]: So the government has to acquire the land from me.
[Amit Varma]: And while the just compensation in real terms would be the notional 40 lakhs I would have
[Amit Varma]: got from Tata directly, the actual market price per se, because the market has been
[Amit Varma]: so restricted, is 1 lakh.
[Amit Varma]: So the government can give me 1 lakh, call it just compensation, and give that land worth
[Amit Varma]: 40 lakhs to Tata.
[Amit Varma]: And all the value is captured by that intermediary, which is basically theft.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I want to add another layer to what you just said, you know.
[Guest]: So it might seem like Tatas are getting a great deal out of this, right?
[Guest]: On the face of it, it's like, oh, Tatas would have had to pay 40 lakhs for the value of
[Guest]: land.
[Guest]: Now they just have to pay 1 lakh.
[Guest]: Look at how terrible the law is, it supports the rich capitalist, it's against the farmer.
[Guest]: That's partially true.
[Guest]: But the problem is that Tatas also cannot acquire land in a reasonable way in this kind
[Guest]: of an economy.
[Guest]: The reason is that, so let's say Tata start acquiring land, the first few pieces of land
[Guest]: go for 1 lakh, they're the most desperate farmers, right?
[Guest]: But Amit Verma is smart.
[Guest]: Amit knows that if he holds out long enough, then Tata would have acquired enough land
[Guest]: that his piece of land is now suddenly even more valuable than 40 lakhs, because his land
[Guest]: is right next to it or right in the middle of it or something like that.
[Guest]: So now, while we are haggling over price, there are holdout problems.
[Guest]: But a holdout problem when you have this kind of disparity in land use is much more magnified.
[Guest]: So now there is basically no sensible way of pricing that asset even before the holdout.
[Guest]: And after the holdout, you're in big trouble.
[Guest]: So what happens is, even large capitalist firms become very soft targets when they are
[Guest]: trying to assemble land in this kind of a system.
[Guest]: So India is really funny.
[Guest]: We're trapped in a world where farmers are dying to sell their land and get out of agriculture.
[Guest]: And we're in a world where rich firms, developers, corporations are dying to buy land to set
[Guest]: up industry.
[Guest]: However, we can't agree upon the price of land.
[Guest]: That seems really weird.
[Guest]: Indians are very good at haggling.
[Guest]: Why is it that we can't agree upon the price of land?
[Guest]: The reason is, there's a dual pricing system, one system before you get the certificate,
[Guest]: one system after you get the certificate.
[Guest]: So it's multiple layers of the problem that you described.
[Amit Varma]: So it's really interesting that while in a free market, you would have a positive sum
[Amit Varma]: game, the farmer would sell it at the market price to the industrialist, the farmer would
[Amit Varma]: benefit, the industrialist would benefit.
[Amit Varma]: But here instead, you almost have a negative sum game where both the farmer and the industrialist
[Amit Varma]: are losing value and that value is going to the middleman.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So now who could these middlemen be?
[Guest]: They are typically people who have a lot of political clout and influence, and who actually
[Guest]: have access to get that change of land use certificate.
[Guest]: Now let's say Amit, you are the farmer, you're a very entrepreneurial farmer, you're trying
[Guest]: to get out of farming and do something else, you try to sell your land.
[Guest]: The selling of the land doesn't work.
[Guest]: You try to go to all the babus and get the change of land use certificate, it doesn't
[Guest]: work because they want so much in bribes that you just don't have the ability to pay them.
[Guest]: And you can't raise credit from the banks because the value of your land is at the bottom
[Guest]: most price, right?
[Guest]: So it's not like your land is actually worth 40 lakhs, so you can raise that money with
[Guest]: using the land as collateral and bribe the babus.
[Guest]: Now you just have your land at one lakh, no one's going to give you money even for bribes.
[Guest]: So that's the situation you're in.
[Guest]: Now what's going to happen is anyone who has a lot of political connections, who is sure
[Guest]: of his ability to get the change of land use certificate, can actually exploit the situation.
[Guest]: And I don't know if you remember, about five years ago, I think in 2012, 2013, a very public
[Guest]: spirited IAS officer called Ashok Khemka exposed a similar scam that was going on in Gurgaon.
[Guest]: So Robert Vadra, who belongs to the Nehru-Gandhi family, he is married to, he's Sonia Gandhi's
[Guest]: son-in-law, he had a firm called Skylight Limited.
[Guest]: What Skylight Limited would do, it was running many, many, many fraudulent operations.
[Guest]: I just want to zero in on one of them.
[Guest]: So what Skylight Corporation was doing was it was having very strange transactions with
[Guest]: DLF, which is the largest developer in Gurgaon.
[Guest]: When you start looking into those transactions, what you see is DLF would lend money to Skylight
[Guest]: to buy a piece of land.
[Guest]: Skylight would buy that piece of land, within four to six weeks of buying the piece of land,
[Guest]: the value of that land would just shoot up, and then it would sell that piece of land
[Guest]: back to DLF for a huge price.
[Guest]: So what you see is, let's do this with numbers.
[Guest]: Let's say there was a piece of land that Robert Vadra's company acquired at one crore.
[Guest]: So the first one crore is given as a loan from DLF to Skylight, Skylight buys the property
[Guest]: at one crore.
[Guest]: As soon as it buys the property, we know that Robert Vadra must have a lot of political
[Guest]: connections.
[Guest]: He legitimately gets the change of land use certificate.
[Guest]: As soon as the change of land use certificate kicks in, the value of the property becomes
[Guest]: 40 crores.
[Guest]: Now he sells that property back to DLF for 40 crores, and DLF writes him a cheque.
[Guest]: So now you have two cheques, one is a loan for one crore, one is a payment for land for
[Guest]: 40 crores.
[Guest]: 39 crores is the profit that is taken up as pure rents by a political entrepreneur, which
[Guest]: in this case is Robert Vadra, because very, very well politically connected.
[Amit Varma]: And this is just a famous scam we've heard of, but this is typically what happens across
[Amit Varma]: the country.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So now, yeah, and I am not trying to blame a particular individual or a political party.
[Guest]: A lot of people are doing this.
[Guest]: I'm not even sure it's a scam, really.
[Guest]: I don't think it's illegal.
[Guest]: I mean, some of the transactions may have been fraudulent, but I don't think it's illegal
[Guest]: to take advantage of a change of land use jump in value, right?
[Guest]: Someone who has access to that, it is perverse, but what I mean is, the system has created
[Guest]: these monsters.
[Guest]: Yeah, but it's a perversity which is enabled by bad regulation.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So if it weren't for this particular instance of a good IAS officer like Khemka and a politically
[Guest]: connected person like Robert Vadra, who we know because it's so high profile, it could
[Guest]: be anyone.
[Guest]: It could be Amit and Shruti, and it would be the exact same result because someone has
[Guest]: to be a middleman.
[Guest]: In fact, I would go as far as saying we almost need these middlemen, otherwise, how would
[Guest]: you actually move towards urbanization and development in a country which is so shackled
[Guest]: by regulation?
[Amit Varma]: There'd be no lubrication in the system and it bugs me so much when people conflate this
[Amit Varma]: kind of crony capitalism with capitalism, they're completely the opposite things.
[Guest]: This is actually not even capitalism.
[Guest]: This is crony socialism.
[Guest]: You have a hangover of terrible socialist regulation, which has not yet been repealed.
[Guest]: You like to say make in India and you want India to be the manufacturing hub and the
[Guest]: services hub and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: You want to rapidly move into a market and capitalist system, but you have no legs to
[Guest]: stand on because the foundation of a capitalist system is the right to private property.
[Guest]: So if you don't have that, you're going to get all this kind of perversity.
[Amit Varma]: I want to quickly sum up some of the unseen effects that you've spoken about.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, infringing the right to property or not protecting it sufficiently impacts
[Amit Varma]: all other rights because the point I keep trying to make is that every right depends
[Amit Varma]: on the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: You can say I have the right to free speech, but where do you express the speech if the
[Amit Varma]: government nationalizes all printing presses and owns all the media, then it's pointless.
[Amit Varma]: So to protect the right to free speech, you need to also protect the right to property.
[Amit Varma]: That's unseen effect number one, all other rights get affected.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen effect number two is that it amounts to a form of theft in the sense that as you
[Amit Varma]: showed in the case of the farmers who are suffering from the regulation that he can't
[Amit Varma]: sell his land, the land of the farmer, which should be worth say 40 lakhs becomes one lakh.
[Amit Varma]: It's not exactly debt capital, but it's comatose capital.
[Amit Varma]: It's very close to debt capital and he's lost all that value because of bad regulation.
[Amit Varma]: And furthermore, it amounts to theft because, you know, even when it's not indirectly through
[Amit Varma]: regulation is directly through just the government taking the land for a much lower price than
[Guest]: what would really be just.
[Guest]: And I would add a fourth that very often when the original legislation or the constitutional
[Guest]: amendment was intended to benefit farmers, now it actually goes against farmers.
[Guest]: The broader point being the moment you give the government arbitrary power, it could be
[Guest]: used against anyone and tomorrow it could turn against you.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, what I've seen is all the regulation which is made with the intention of helping
[Amit Varma]: the poor usually ends up redistributing wealth from the poor to the rich.
[Amit Varma]: This being a classic example.
[Amit Varma]: So looking ahead, are you hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: Are things ever going to change?
[Amit Varma]: Are we going to start taking the right to property seriously?
[Amit Varma]: And more importantly, is it ever going to be an issue which can animate the masses so
[Amit Varma]: that the demand, I mean, that is the only way anything changes in politics, right?
[Guest]: If there's demand for it from down.
[Guest]: So I am hopeful about the future in the following sense that I think there are many instances
[Guest]: of countries in the world, let's say China, which don't actually have what we call a de
[Guest]: jure right to property, which is, you know, on paper constitutionally protected, but which
[Guest]: have very good de facto right to property.
[Guest]: That is, the government understands how important right to property is, and it respects that.
[Guest]: So there are many cases, even where you have a constitutionally messed up system or no
[Guest]: system at all, that you could actually get a robust system of property rights bottom
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I'm optimistic.
[Guest]: A second part that makes me optimistic is that the more wealthy an economy becomes,
[Guest]: the more advocates and fighters and activists you have for the right to property.
[Guest]: Now remember, who was fighting all these cases in the 1950s?
[Guest]: It was the flamboyant Sir Kameshwar Singh.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: His property was threatened, right?
[Guest]: He wasn't a public spirited person.
[Guest]: He was a self-interested person who was fighting to keep his land.
[Guest]: So as India becomes more prosperous, and maybe through some other mechanisms, as small businesses
[Guest]: grow into big businesses, so on and so forth, I'm hopeful that more and more people would
[Guest]: become advocates of property because they're no longer living on handouts of the government
[Guest]: or a redistribution economy, but they actually need their property to survive.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: The third reason I'm hopeful is that in a rhetorical sense, landless farmers whose land
[Guest]: has been taken away and given to the big bad capitalists make for a great poster child
[Guest]: and rhetorical device than Sir Kameshwar Singh did.
[Guest]: So I'm hopeful that going forward in the future, I anticipate a lot of taking of land from
[Guest]: poor farmers, and maybe that will lead to a new kind of agitation or activism in favor
[Guest]: of property, right?
[Guest]: So those are the things that make me hopeful.
[Guest]: What makes me pessimistic is any kind of reform in India is extremely slow.
[Guest]: And right now, if you have the money, you can escape a lot of the bad loopholes of this
[Guest]: system and sort of carry on.
[Guest]: So the only people who are truly affected by this terrible system are the poor, in an
[Guest]: everyday sort of sense.
[Guest]: And it's really hard for the poor to fight their regular economic battles and then also
[Guest]: fight legal and constitutional battles.
[Guest]: So some kind of a tension between these two forces socially will eventually take us where
[Guest]: we're going to end up.
[Guest]: But I am partially hopeful.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, it's been really illuminating talking to you.
[Guest]: Thanks so much for your time.
[Guest]: Thanks so much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: This was great fun.
[Amit Varma]: For more insight on the right to property, check out Shruti's eight-part essay series
[Amit Varma]: on the subject in Pragati, the online magazine I edit at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Shruti on Twitter at srajgopalan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Until next week then, buh-bye.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and The Unseen, check out another show by IVM Podcasts,
[Amit Varma]: Symbolified, which is hosted by my good friends Naren, Chuck and Srikith.
[Unknown]: You can download it on any podcasting network.